Basics and Bonding
-----------------

The aim of this exercise is to familiarise you with setting up and running
some CASTEP calculations using the Materials Studio interface.

You will run some simple and small CASTEP calculations on canonical examples
of covalently and ionically bonded materials - silicon and sodium chloride -
and use the results to study the bonding from an electronic structure perspective.

1.  Start Materials Studio and create a new project. Choose a suitable
    name such as "Si2".  Import the structure if Si2 from the examples
    directory (accessed fron File->Import).  Now start the CASTEP
    interface.  Explore the default choice of options. There is a tab
    marked "Properties".  Please select the one marked "Population Analysis".

    When you are ready, run CASTEP.  

    This should take a few seconds and produce a readable output file
    "Si2.castep". Examine this, see what values of parameters CASTEP
    chose for you.  Find the section of the file which monitors the
    SCF loop and the approach to convergence.  How many SCF iterations
    did it need?

2.  The next task is to visualise the electron (charge) density computed
    by CASTEP.  Re-select your input structure and start the
    "CASTEP Analysis" tool.   Select the option to analyse electron
   density.  

   Explore using isosurfaces to visualise and help you understand
   the shape of the charge density.  You can change the isosurface value, 

   a) Can you explain what you see at an isosurface value of 0.5?
   b) Can you see any features which might be characteristic of
      a covalently-bonded crystal.
   c) Do you notice anything strange about the charge density close to the
      Si nucleus?   Can you explain this as a consequence of the particular kind
      of electronic structure calculation you have just performed?

3. Instead of the full charge density, try creating and reading in
   a charge density difference. Can this help understand the bonding 
   better than the full density?

7. Repeat the above exercises for sodium chloride instead of silicon.  Run
   the castep calculation using the NaCl.cell file provided.

   Can you understand (from the NaCl.castep output file) why this 
   calculation takes much longer to run than silicon?

8. Re-run the sodium shloride example, first checking the
   "population analysis" option in the CASTEP tool "Properties" tab.

   At the end of the NaCl.castep you will find a block describing a
   "population analysis", ie which electrons belong to which atoms.
   Compare this with your silicon calculation. What can you learn about
   the bonding from this?

9. Prepare and visualise the charge density just as for silicon.
   
   Note what similarities and differences you find compared to
   silicon?  Does this help explain the difference in bond chemistry
   between silicon and sodium chloride?

   Does this help explain why there are many reasonable empirical
   potentials for NaCl to be found in the simulation literature, but
   that finding good potentials for silicon is a very tough challenge?

10. Repeat for a metal, Al.
